**Node**

**Area (colour)**

[🗯️**Discourses](https://lean-sphynx-49b.notion.site/Discourses-ab06ed1436054e5b9bf0c0af92149114?pvs=21)

**Tags**

  

**Links**

**Literature**

[Felt, 2016](https://lean-sphynx-49b.notion.site/Felt-2016-36270d70e95f4705bc84d1e8a390b463?pvs=21)

**Abstract/Summary**

Conclusion from [Felt, 2016](https://lean-sphynx-49b.notion.site/Felt-2016-36270d70e95f4705bc84d1e8a390b463?pvs=21), p. 63fff:

**“Response-able Practices” or “New Bureaucracies of Virtue”: The Challenges of Making RRI Work in Academic Environments**

First, I want to argue that **introducing RRI as a buzzword**, establishing a new cluster of narratives on responsible research and innovation and funding some related projects/programs **will most probably not be enough to reach the claimed shifts in research culture and practice**. To this end, we first have to gain a detailed understanding of how researchers can make sense of RRI in an environment in which their epistemic living space is strongly shaped by new public management ideals with a pinch of nostalgia for a time when these issues did not need to be considered. It is the responsibility conditions researchers navigate that require careful consideration when we expect RRI to be fully integrated into research practices. This also calls for considering the many meanings of responsibility in RRI and making the debate not only about the potential problems RRI might cause but about how to think about what new benefits this engagement could create for both science and society. In particular, the way in which research is valued, organized and timed needs close scrutiny because these elements shape the distribution of reflexive work among different researchers and within research processes. If we simply allow the NPM and RRI narratives to exist next to each other without a clear idea of how time and space can be made for reflexive work, we run the risk that introducing the RRI principles might not lead to the expected opening up of science towards societal challenges, concerns and values. Instead, we might witness the pragmatic creation of new forms to be filled out to prove that some form of RRI has been performed, the process of reflection might turn into an annex ritual to be performed in the beginning or the end of a project, or we could witness the complete outsourcing of reflexivity and anticipation to other researchers. This would ultimately lead to nothing more than the creation of “new bureaucracies of virtue.”6 It would thus support 6 This notion was inspired by Jacob and Riles (2007), who coined it to study informed consent as 4 “Response-able Practices” or “New Bureaucracies of Virtue”: The Challenges the research systems’ ‘account-ability’ logic also in the field of RRI but without fostering researchers’ willingness and capacity to explore values-sensitive responses to the complex questions that arise at the interfaces of science and society, i.e., making researchers ‘response-able’. Second, to make RRI work in a sustainable manner, it is essential to create institutional environments and foster narratives that allow caring for society to be fully integrated into the very core activities of academic research, well beyond any single project. RRI should thus be understood and implemented as a “technology of humility” (Jasanoff 2003), i.e., become an approach that acknowledges the complexities and uncertainties linked to research and innovation in contemporary societies and that “make[s] apparent the possibility of unforeseen consequences; make[s] explicit the normative that lurks within the [scientific and the] technical; and acknowledge[s] from the start the need for plural viewpoints and collective learning” (Jasanoff 2003, 240). Therefore, RRI would need to become integral part of the process of knowledge creation. This means developing, nurturing and valuing researchers’ capacities of anticipation, reflexivity, inclusion and responsiveness. In the end, researchers should learn to not only ask questions relevant to their field but also develop sensitivities for detecting how societal problems to be solved are framed, how innovations might affect people in very different ways, how the benefits from knowledge and innovation are often unevenly distributed and where the limit is of what they know beyond the lab. This means that although it is important to integrate social scientists and other humanities scholars into the core of research and innovation processes, RRI should not solely be delegated to them and thus be kept out of the core research and innovation business. In short, a successful establishment of RRI also means that new knowledge relations have to emerge “between people engaged in different knowledge-generation practices and thus ways of seeing and explaining the world” (Felt 2014). This calls for opening up to cooperation not only across disciplinary boundaries but also between scientific and diverse societal actors and making space and time for this type of interdisciplinary work in the highly competitive climate that governs research as well as education. Education is essential here, as it not only trains the next generation of academic researchers but above all cultivates highly specialized citizens who will work at the interfaces of science and society and will, in a fast changing technoscientific world, increasingly be required to have these reflexive capacities for which RRI stands. Third, the situatedness of researchers needs to be considered when they are supposed to engage in RRI work. Actually, when we hear the call for engagement, we might point with Suchman (2013, 157) at the ways in which “commerce and politics get both entangled and obscured in contemporary calls for ‘user’ relevance in all things.” Indeed, when thinking of considering societal values in research we might encounter two very different meanings: “calls for value in the sense of utility, and a recognition of values as inextricable from the conduct of research.” Therefore when one expresses such new bureaucracies of virtue. In this paper, the notion is developed in a slightly different direction and is not specifically tied to the core questions of ethics in biomedicine. U. Fel

65 implementing RRI, it is essential to differentiate “between normative research enlisted in the service of agendas—public or private—in which the frame is not itself open to question, and research that affiliates with efforts to question the frames within which politics, markets or any other entities are disciplined.” It is the latter which was at the core of many actors who wanted to see RRI implemented in academic practice. In that sense, and the fear remains as for earlier programmes (e.g., ELSI/ELSA programmes mentioned earlier), that serious RRI engagement could also be sacrificed in favor of a more pragmatic and less time-consuming window dressing program that merely gives the impression of doing RRI. It could follow a pragmatic framing aiming at rendering research more robust towards societal questioning but not too open to develop new framings of innovation and new innovation pathways. This perspective needs careful reflection in the funding processes of RRI-related activities, which should not normatively define what type of activities to foster and should not try to develop ready-made toolboxes that are then distributed in form of one-size-fits-all formats; rather, they should invite more open contextand institution-specific forms of engagement. Finally, to grasp the complexity of the process of integrating RRI into contemporary research and innovation, it might be helpful to think of RRI in terms of a “techno-moral regime” that should be put to work within the wider research and innovation system. Choosing the metaphor of “regime” is helpful for several reasons. It makes us alert to the institutions of research and innovation and the people who govern them, to their ideologies and the myths they cherish (see the above-mentioned narrative infrastructures), and to the outputs they aim to achieve but also to the ways in which power is exercised (e.g., through evaluation practices, preferred narratives, career scripts, and many more). The notion of the regime also draws our attention to the many explicit and implicit prescriptions, ranging from science policies regulating the types of research that can be performed, over definitions of good academic practice to how we think of and try to foster societal progress as tightly coupled to science and technological development. Simultaneously, any specific regime is never uncontested. As I argue, any techno-moral regime building on RRI-related values is contested by ideals of efficiency, accountability rules, tight time frames and much more; in short, the techno-morality of new public management is a powerful and often implicit opponent to the one performed through RRI-related values. The techno-moral regime of RRI must therefore grapple with opposition and varying forms of dissent or resistance from both outside and within the institutions of research and innovation. Analyzing RRI as a regime invites us to simultaneously look at the different levels, spaces and moments in which responsible research is negotiated and makes us aware of the strong commitment by many of the involved actors—researchers, societal actors, institutional leadership, policy makers and funding bodies—that is needed to allow RRI to remain open-ended and process-oriented in an academic world that prefers clear directions and promised deliverables.